The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
Today we continue with part three of our interview with author Jack Williamson.
Say in reference to cloning or genetic engineering, would you say that there is no area of science
that man can monkey with anything he wants? Is there anything which we shouldn't touch,
which would be wrong for science to meddle with or monkey with?
Well, I suppose I'm a sort of a relative. Maybe I'm a Darwinian evolutionist.
It's hard to find any absolute symbols or standards or whatever, what is wrong and right.
If you look at the whole evolutionary picture, why some things, patterns of growth and ways
of behavior and so forth lead to the survival of the individual and the species, and some don't.
That's one available standard of behavior. If you look at that, why the technologies
seem likely to survive and prevail unless they destroy themselves and whatever is going to destroy.
The race is obviously bad in that way, and it seems to me whom we open the atom risk skating on thin ice,
and there might be similar hazards in genetic engineering that is theoretically we could
design a form of life that would wipe us out. Maybe we will.
Maybe we need the humanoids to keep us from doing that.
That's what they're for, but personally being sort of individualist, I hate to give up completely
the humanoids. There is one more work I keep forgetting about this one, the CT work, CT ship,
is that the way that's pronounced?
CT, it was a kind of abbreviated contra-terrine with the letters C and T and I just spelled it out.
That was a work I did for Kamal and enjoyed doing it. I went to him with the idea for a series of
stories about the planetary engineers who would terraform new worlds, that is, would rebuild them,
take away the atmosphere, the chemistry, maybe the gravitation, whatever, to make them suitable
for human settlement. Kamal suggested that some of these new worlds might be CT, that is,
antimatter, which was pretty new to science fiction then. I was fascinated and I did a series of stories
and then a serial that eventually became two novels.
Where did you come up with the concept terraformed? Did you coin that word?
As far as I know, I invented the word. There are a few such terms that I think I can claim credit for,
such as terraforming and psionics and the android is distinct from the Robert and so forth.
Didn't the CT novel and the short stories lead into a syndicated strip in the newspapers?
Yeah, that was one of my exciting adventures. I was sitting at the desk one day when the phone rang
and the editor of the New York Sunday News was on the line and wanted to know if I would come to
New York and write a comic strip and I caught my breath and said I would and they had read one of
the CT novels, reviewed in the New York Times by a rather superior reviewer who said that the plot
was pretty interesting but the way of writing made it look like a science fiction comic strip
and this was in the early days of commercial TV when people were turning on the tube on Sunday
morning instead of buying the Sunday news and somebody thought that if they had exclusive
strips instead of syndicated strips that everybody else had it might give them a competitive edge.
There isn't a planned four new comics including a Western and a Mystery and Adventure I think,
but the science fiction one was the only one they did. It ran for three years but eventually
didn't turn out to be the answer to TV. But the artist was Leah Lias who used to work with
Milk and Ifom Terry and the Pirates and has a nice clean cut style and was good with new and
strange characters and good with machines and the thing was fun to do. My heart was broken when
it ended because I'd come to enjoy getting a regular check and it was at that time that I
went back part-time into the academic world because I'd started taking college courses
while the strip was running because it didn't take all my time to write it and
asked for a graduate assistantship and math and they didn't have one but I was stared to
run in English which turned out to be a unfortunate choice and the academic world did mesh very well
with writing. It's wonderful to be paid to read good literature and talk about it with a
congenial group of students and I enjoyed teaching and found that I was able to continue writing
during holidays and vacations and maybe I learned a little bit more about
literature and about people and so forth. I think it was a very happy experience.
Didn't you also put together one of the first courses on science fiction?
I think so. Mark Heligus at Colgate University wrote the first one that I knew about that was
written up in the National Cervoir and I took the article out and showed it to the curriculum
committee and chairman at Eastern and got approval for a course.
What time was that? That was in, let's see Heligus started his course in 62 and I started
1964 and taught it for a dozen years and spent part of those years doing all I could to promote
academic science fiction elsewhere. I accumulated descriptions of other courses and lectured and
published articles and finally put together a textbook for science fiction teachers and anthology
of articles by likes of Asimov and Gwynne and Garn and others that has finally been published.
How do you keep up with science? You must have a fairly extensive scientific background or any
you know good science fiction writer must you? Well I've always been as I said fascinated with
science as a sort of unfolding mystery that is I want to know as much as I can about
the nature of the origins of the universe and I subscribe to a whole group of magazines,
Science News, the Scientific American Science which is the publication of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science which is much of it pretty technical but some things in it I can
understand. I subscribe to a couple of astronomy magazines, I've subscribed to a couple of computer
magazines since I bought the word processor and occasionally I get off to other events. My wife
and I attended the Jupiter flyby at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory March a year ago and got a
short story out of that that I called it they sent into the great red spot though I think
and editors changing the name of it and we've been invited back to the southern flyby
come November and something like that which gives you an opportunity to see actual science at work
and science unfolding is it's about as exciting as anything could be. The Jupiter flyby where the
the pictures of Jupiter and its satellites were coming in on the monitors one every 48 seconds
most of them you knew would never be seen again it would select some to form more study but most
of them were disappeared and it was just exciting these it was like exploring a new solar system
these satellites up to that time it just been spots a light in the telescope and
at the nearest best approaches where you can see details just a few kilometers across and each
satellite was different with a different history with different clues about the origins of itself
and the whole solar system and maybe the universe so things like that might make science as interesting
as anything I know. To change the subject again, let's see if I remember now you have been president
of the science fiction writers association are you still are? I finished my second term
less than a month ago and I hope now to get back to to more science fiction. The term is for how
long? It's term is only for one year and it was a very rewarding experience as I guess I've said
before science fiction is a pretty small friendly close community and a lot of people in it have
been good friends over the years and it was an opportunity to try to do something for science
fiction but it took a good deal of time. What were your duties if you don't mind? Well
there we have about 500 members we have all sorts of activities one of the most important
is a grievance committee that tries to let's say avoid difficulties with editors and publishers
and so forth to make sure that they treat us right. We have the Nubular Awards that are given each year
to recognize work in the field we attempt to also publicize and propagandize science fiction
and there are many many people in the organization who devote a lot of priceless time and energy to
this but the whole thing has to be coordinated and people drop out and have to be replaced
and misunderstandings develop that have to be somehow explained and new projects come along that
need to be supported and there wasn't any one thing that that took a great deal of time but there
was a continual flow of problems and minor decisions and so forth so that every week I'd have to spend
maybe a couple of days catching up on the the mail and phone calls and whatever.
What are the criteria for membership? Is everybody who is everybody automatically a member who
publishes a story or does it have to take application? You have to make application and
an affiliate member has to have at least one story professionally published in it
an active member the requirement for that is three stories short stories or short works that
doesn't have to be fiction stories or a longer work such as a novel or whatever
and the deal is now of forty dollars a year and that we have two publications and monthly
well between them they're monthly a forum that is essentially for the members with
with official business and market reports and whatever and a bulletin that comes out
four times a year that is devoted to more general articles background material on science and
science fiction and the members are usually privileged to attend the self-wised read at the
convention and I'd say membership is a sort of ticket to a club that I regard as exciting to
you said there are some 500 members yes that must be the largest obviously the largest it's ever
been oh yes it has grown still growing steadily the science fiction market as well until the last
year or so was was booming various publishers paperback publishers had regular plans to publish
four six sometimes eight titles a month and so that where Charlie Brown of Locust was keeping
a record of the books published and that kept growing until the total past a thousand a year
about half reprint and half new including fantasy as well as science fiction and I think that
well since the depression and whatever it was where many publishers have cut back their schedules
and it's a little harder for a new writer to break in wise but
it's still very profitable and exciting field compared to what it was when there was one magazine
I got 25 bucks for my first story and of course the big money is from films and tv and such things
I know you said that it's hard for you to keep up with everything that's being published today but
do you have any particularly favorite authors the younger ones say starting the last 10 years
or so that you think you're going to be able well I don't follow well enough to say anything very
intelligent when I was teaching I regarded Ursula Le Guin's left hand of darkness as a
probably the best reason novel and I'm a great admirer of Heinlein especially the early Heinlein
Arthur Clark and but I don't don't really keep up I just read or reread some of Gordon Dixon's
child cycle and impressed with a broad optimistic view of human change and evolution that he's
presenting what about new wave authors I guess a new wave technically is passed I think so
what's your response to that I felt that the new wave was well I was sort of adding new wave
because I felt the new wave people were first of all they were intensely pessimistic about
science and they were trying to throw out the the traditional accepted literary patterns that
at least were accepted by me and and used in the field and turning back to to literary experiments
by people like Doris Pysos and James Joyce they had been tried a generation ago and they were
brought on as they were something new again but I think by and large well let's say some of the
new wave writers were very able and the the impact of the new world has been a new wave has been to
improve the well the awareness of literary values of style and so forth so by and large it's been a
good thing is it possible to blend the say the mainstream or the new wave attempt with with
good science fiction are they are they mutually exclusive or is it possible to have the mainstream
material at science fiction well I'm not enthusiastic about consolidating mainstream
literature and science fiction but I also remember that there was a time when science fiction wasn't
walled off in a category by itself and I don't think there's any reason it should be when Welles
was publishing his stories they were just novels or romances or whatever and the science fiction was
in a sort of ghetto quote ghetto for a generation I think this was partly due to the fact that he's
published in pop magazines and people look down on the popes I think we're sort of getting over that
but it's still a category a publisher's category like westerns or gothics or low romances or whatever
and that means that if Don Wilhelm or Judy Lynn Del Ray or someone else packages a book in a
recognizable science fiction package it'll sell enough copies to make a profit but it's a
science fiction rax and the stands and the general public doesn't see it so people who get to be
best sellers successful people like gone in vinyl gut and so forth tend to want to get the
science fiction label off their stories when they begin to sell enough copies but I've never reached
that stage myself I'm proud to have my own call science fiction you don't see a mora saying
comparing it you're uniquely qualified to do this they're comparing the readership of science fiction
today with say back in the 30s or early 40s wouldn't you see a greater proportion of the population
reads and and appreciate science fiction I think so when I started what nobody knew what it was
you had to explain it there was one science fiction magazine though some science fiction
stories were running in magazines like galaxy and people like wells and conan dollout had been
publishing occasional science fiction for not for a specialized audience all along but certainly
certainly there are more people reading now than they ever were before but there are a lot more
people who see it on tv or see science fiction movies they'll never read any of it when you go
to a convention these days where the star trek fans and the comic book fans and the star wars
fans and so forth sort of outnumber the science fiction fans a couple weeks ago I was at a convention
in phoenix that was attended by I think about 800 people and I was really the only
identifiable hard science fiction writer there they were they were there were star wars characters and
there were comic books authors and so forth who had the big public and that's I'm no complaint
about that you don't think that hurts the kind of science fiction that you value more say the movies
the television that kind of material well movies have very seldom been good science fiction
there've been a few good science fiction films but the science fiction or the sort I like is
has been called a literature of ideas and to some extent it is and and the films I think
necessarily deal not in ideas but in with emotions with sensation I just saw the shining
and and I liked it as a superb piece of filmic craftsmanship. Tuberick wanted to
scare the socks off the audience and by and large he did about as well as anybody ever will
there are people who feel the neglected characterization and feel that the explanation of
supernatural is not consistent but I feel that Tuberick knew what he was doing and he did it
considering consistency where it seems to me that he was making a deliberate appeal to the irrational
to the inexplicable to the totally mysterious and if he tried to explain all the the ghosts in the
old hotel where he would have been letting down the suspense at the same time so I love it
but do you think there have been any successful science fiction movies and well
2001 I think was was tremendous and there are a number of others that are
regardless classics but typically the movies and tv haven't done what might have been done
in the first year or two of Star Trek they were buying professionally published science fiction
stories or stories written by professional writers and I thought many of them were pretty good
and gradually as time went on while they went more and more into the most standard Hollywood
format and had less and less originality creativity and so forth and well space 1999 and
battle star galactica are worse that is they have plenty of money for all sorts of expensive
special effects but they are contempt for the intelligence the audience that is they don't
they don't care about ideas about consistency or whatever all they're trying to do is
create an emotional effect that if you know too much science or care too much about believability
while the emotional effect doesn't work what do you think goes into making a good science fiction
story well of course I'm something I'll believe in myself in emotional fakes that is you need a
strong conflict and you need something that will evolve the involve the reader emotionally
so that you need characters that he can either hate or identify with and you need some sense of
originality you need if you've got it something new though that is not always possible and I
tend myself to well to look for a theme for some sort of significant statement about science or the
literature or the the impact of science and technology on individual human beings on human
life on society on what the world might be but I think all of it is important as for the
writer to be generally genuinely interested in what he's saying about something relevant to
science and technology and change seems to me the essential thing is probably that
science fiction recognizes that the world is changing under the impact of technology the
future is going to be different and the mainstream quote audience either doesn't know this or
prefers to forget it or whatever that's a good distinction to make I was going to ask you is
that something you present in your you're presented in your classes when you taught science fiction
that it it's concerned with change I think so distinction of mainstream material speaking of
teaching why do you think science fiction say should be taught say say as far down as junior
high junior high high school college is there any particular value it can offer students well I
think that assuming that science fiction does deal with change the world is really changing so the
recognition of this is an element of reality or realism that you don't have in a lot of classic
literature and kids growing up are going to be living in a world that's different from the world
around them now it seems to me they have a legitimate interest in what the future is going to be and in
a practical teaching situation you're trying to pull kids off the playground out of in front of
TV and teach them to read and to understand and to think and sometimes this is is pretty difficult
I've tried various approaches to various literary figures and periods and some of them work very
well and some of them don't and it seems to me that science fiction offers a sort of bridge or
door or whatever to the interest of a lot of students that you don't have if you try to
well go back to Shakespeare let's say yeah I think one thing science fiction forces a person
who's reading it to do is to think about the future and to think about the world he's living in
is related to the future I think that's basically what it's about really as much as you can say
it's about anything and it seems to me that that generally you can classify it more or less as
utopian or dystopian that is that you can look for some assumption that the technology is good
or that technology is bad that the future is going to be better or the future is going to be worse
or that the human being is a helpless victim of his environment and his own nature or that he can
make significant decisions and and change his environment and and make things better than there
were so that's that was basically the the approach I took in my classes beginning I like to begin
with the second two books of God's progress which is written as deliberate criticism of
the early scientists of the royal society and so forth and to present as far as I could selected
stories that would be briefs on both sides dystopias and utopias optimism and pessimism
selection from such people as well Clark and Heinlein and so forth on one side and
they've my own human eyes so there's plenty of dystopian fiction usually better written and
more engaging than the optimistic science fiction well though if you're going to categorize like
that so you put wells and huxley and swift maybe ellison on the one hand maybe Heinlein as them
off people like that on the other I would put you on that side the second side was the optimists
ultimately even though you did write the human eyes well that's where I like to be okay that's fair
this concludes our three-part interview with science fiction author jack Williamson
this is david cruise daryl laine and david carcen this has been the science fiction radio show a
presentation of the permean basin science fiction association in conjunction with kocv fm and odessa
college odessa texas